Prometheus translation modes (#4533)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/metrics/sdk_exporters/prometheus.md

include / exclude or regular expression based). Copied Resource attributes MUST NOT be
excluded from the `target` info metric. The option MAY be named `with_resource_constant_labels`.

A Prometheus Exporter MAY support a configuration option that controls the translation of metric names from OpenTelemetry Naming Conventions to [Prometheus Naming conventions](https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/naming/).
If the Prometheus exporter supports such configuration it MUST be named `translation_strategy`, and the translation options MUST be:

- `UnderscoreEscapingWithSuffixes`, the default. This fully escapes metric names for classic Prometheus metric name compatibility, and includes appending type and unit suffixes.
- `NoUTF8EscapingWithSuffixes` will disable changing special characters to `_`. Special suffixes like units and `_total` for counters will be attached.
- `NoTranslation`. This strategy bypasses all metric and label name translation, passing them through unaltered.

> A Prometheus Exporter MAY support a configuration option to produce metrics without the UNIT metadata. The option MAY be named `without_units`, and MUST be `false` by default. Attention: this option isn't related to unit suffixes.

Reviewer: Is this still useful if it just controls metadata?  It doesn't ever hurt to include the `#UNIT` line, right?

Author: Yeah, I guess you're right. If `# UNIT` is not supported, it will be just another code comment.

Author: Should we just remove this configuration option completely then?

include / exclude or regular expression based). Copied Resource attributes MUST NOT be
excluded from the `target` info metric. The option MAY be named `with_resource_constant_labels`.

A Prometheus Exporter MAY support a configuration option that controls the translation of metric names from OpenTelemetry Naming Conventions to [Prometheus Naming conventions](https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/naming/).

> If the Prometheus exporter supports such configuration it MUST be named `translation_strategy`, and the translation options MUST be:

Reviewer 2: I don't think we should enforce the configuration name with MUST, esp because the without_units configuration option MAY be named that as indicated below.

Author: I'm not sure if we're understanding each other here 🤔 

I'm adding a MUST for the configuration name to ensure consistency between Prometheus and OTel SDKs and Collector components. That was our goal here, right?

The `without_unit` existed before this change and was used to control both suffix addition and the inclusion of UNIT metadata. The change I'm proposing is that `without_unit` doesn't control suffix addition anymore, just the metadata inclusion

Reviewer 2: Got it, thanks!

Author: Ah good point, I was focusing mostly on configuration options that are based on YAML files and forgot that SDKs don't talk YAML. I'll make some adjustments here

- `UnderscoreEscapingWithSuffixes`, the default. This fully escapes metric names for classic Prometheus metric name compatibility, and includes appending type and unit suffixes.
- `NoUTF8EscapingWithSuffixes` will disable changing special characters to `_`. Special suffixes like units and `_total` for counters will be attached.

> - `NoTranslation`. This strategy bypasses all metric and label name translation, passing them through unaltered.

Author: Does it really? [I can't see it in the code](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/blob/9e73fb43b3dbf3574fbfad3b8d84843e057f47f8/config/config.go#L1557-L1580) 🤔

A Prometheus Exporter MUST support [content negotiation](https://prometheus.io/docs/instrumenting/content_negotiation/) to allow clients to request metrics in different formats based on the `Accept` header in HTTP requests.

## Supported Formats

A Prometheus Exporter SHOULD support the following formats in order of preference, as defined by the [Prometheus content negotiation specification](https://prometheus.io/docs/instrumenting/content_negotiation/):

1. **OpenMetrics Text 1.0.0** (`application/openmetrics-text; version=1.0.0`)
2. **OpenMetrics Text 0.0.1** (`application/openmetrics-text; version=0.0.1`)  
3. **Prometheus Text 1.0.0** (`text/plain; version=1.0.0`)
4. **Prometheus Text 0.0.4** (`text/plain; version=0.0.4`) - MUST be supported as the minimum requirement

A Prometheus Exporter MAY additionally support:

- **Prometheus Protobuf** (`application/vnd.google.protobuf; proto=io.prometheus.client.MetricFamily; encoding=delimited`)

## Escaping Schemes

For text formats version 1.0.0 and above, the exporter MUST support [escaping schemes](https://prometheus.io/docs/instrumenting/content_negotiation/#escaping-scheme) as specified in the `Accept` header:

> - `allow-utf8` - Allow UTF-8 characters in metric and label names
> - `underscores` - Replace invalid characters with underscores  
> - `dots` - Replace invalid characters with dots
> - `values` - Escape invalid characters in values only

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `allow-utf8` - Allow UTF-8 characters in metric and label names
- `underscores` - Replace invalid characters with underscores  
- `dots` - Replace dots with `_dot_` and invalid characters with underscores
- `values` - Escape invalid characters with UTF-8 code points as defined in: https://github.com/prometheus/docs/blob/main/docs/instrumenting/escaping_schemes.md#value-encoding-escaping-values
```

Reviewer 2: or some other summary of the correct escaping schemes

## Format Selection

When responding to requests, a Prometheus Exporter MUST:

1. Parse the `Accept` header to determine the client's preferred format and escaping scheme
2. Select the highest-weighted format that the exporter supports
3. Apply the requested escaping scheme if specified for the selected format
4. Respond with the appropriate `Content-Type` header indicating the selected format and escaping scheme

## Interaction with Translation Strategy

Although a Prometheus Exporter MAY be configured with a `translation_strategy` for internal metric processing, the final output format and character escaping MUST follow what the content negotiation process determines based on the client's `Accept` header. The content negotiation requirements take precedence over the configured translation strategy when determining the final output format.

For example:

- If configured with `NoTranslation` but the client requests `escaping=underscores`, the exporter MUST apply underscore escaping

> - If configured with `UnderscoreEscapingWithSuffixes` but the client `escaping=allow-utf8`, there's no need to revert what has been translated since the SDK will continue to be compliant.

Reviewer 2: love this clarification!

A Prometheus Exporter MUST support content negotiation to allow clients to request
metrics in different formats based on the `Accept` header in HTTP requests. Content
negotiation MUST follow [Prometheus Content Negotiation guidelines](https://prometheus.io/docs/instrumenting/content_negotiation/).

### Interaction with Translation Strategy

> Although a Prometheus Exporter MAY be configured with a `translation_strategy` for internal metric processing, the final output format and character escaping MUST follow what the content negotiation process determines based on the client's `Accept` header. The content negotiation requirements take precedence over the configured translation strategy when determining the final output format.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Although a Prometheus Exporter MAY be configured with a `translation_strategy` for internal metric processing, the final output format and character escaping MUST follow what the content negotiation process determines based on the client's `Accept` header. The content negotiation requirements MUST take precedence over the configured translation strategy when determining the final output format.
```
